Gobble
======

This is a simple blogging engine written in Go.  Its features are:

 - Works on any platform that Go can build for.
 - Does not require a database.
 - Syntax highlighting via Rainbow.
 - Comment spam detection via Akismet.
 - Easy to install.
 - Fast.
 - Python 3 script to convert from an XML WordPress export to Gobble format.
 - Configurable via JSON file.
 - Posts are stored on the file system.
 - Posts and comments are written in Markdown.
 - Search.
 - Archives list.
 - Paging.
 - Tagging.
 - RSS feed.
 - Simple re-theming.


Writing Posts
-------------

All posts are stored in the gobble/posts directory.  All posts are written in
Markdown, with metadata included at the top of the post giving the publish date,
tags, etc.  The format is identical to that used by Scriptogram.

To write a post, create a new file in the posts directory.  Call it whatever you
like, but ensure it has the extension ".md".  Here's an example:


    Title: My First Gobble Post
    Date: 2013-02-02 01:18:36
    Tags: helloworld, fristpost

    This is my first Gobble post!


Save the file and start Gobble.  Your post should now appear.  Clicking on the
"Tags" link in the navigation menu will show the two tags, and the "Archives"
page will show this new post's title and publish date.


Tagging
-------

Tags are specified as a list of words in a post's metadata block, separated by
commas.  They should be lower-case, but Gobble will automatically convert them
to lower-case for you should you enter some with upper-case characters.


Theming
-------

Gobble supports multiple themes, which can be found in the gobble/themes
directory.  Each theme consists of image, css and templates folders.  All are
designed to be standards compliant and easy to edit.

When editing templates, take care not to disturb content between {{brackets}}.
These are part of Go's templating system and function as placeholders for
content generated by Gobble.  Changing these may break the templates.


Post Caching
------------

Rather than use a database, which would increase the complexity of Gobble and
its installation, Gobble stores all of its posts on the file system.  However,
when Gobble is running it caches the entire content of the blog in memory.  This
may sound a little excessive, but simianzombie.com consists of 280,000 words
spread over 480 posts and 912 comments, and uses just 2MB of disk space.
Storing the posts in RAM makes retrieving and searching them extremely fast.

The cache is updated by a background task every 10 minutes, which reloads the
entire dataset from disk.


Installation
------------

The easiest way to install Gobble is via the command line.  Assuming you have Go
installed and configured correctly:

 - go get bitbucket.org/ant512/gobble
 - go get github.com/bmizerany/pat
 - go get github.com/russross/blackfriday
 - cd $GOPATH/src/bitbucket.org/ant512/gobble
 - go build
 - ./gobble

Gobble wil now be available at http://localhost:8080.


Ubuntu Gobble Service
---------------------

If you are deploying to an Ubuntu server, you can set up Gobble as a service to
run at system startup:

 - cd /etc/init
 - sudo nano gobble.conf
 - Insert the following text:

    description     "gobble web server"

    start on startup

    chdir path_to_gobble/gobble
    exec ./gobble

 - sudo service gobble start

To stop Gobble:

 - sudo service gobble stop


Startup Options
---------------

The only command line argument currently available is `-config`, which allows
you to specify a different config file for Gobble to load:

    ./gobble -config ./gobble.conf


Configuration
-------------

Gobble's configuration is changed by editing the gobble.conf file.  You can
specify a different file to use via the command line, and therefore have
multiple Gobble servers running simultaneously.

The default config file looks like this:

    {                                                 
    	"name": "Gobble",
        "description": "Blogging Engine",
        "address": "http://simianzombie.com",
        "port": 8080,
        "postPath": "./posts",
        "theme": "grump",
        "akismetAPIKey": ""
    }

The config file is a JSON document.  When editing the file, ensure that you
respect the JSON conventions.

The options are defined as follows:

 - name:          the site's name.
 - description:   the site's description, which appears on the RSS feed.
 - address:       the site's address, which appears on the RSS feed and is sent
                  to Akismet for comment validation.
 - port:          the port on which Gobble should listen.
 - postPath:      the path to the posts directory.
 - theme:         the theme to use.
 - akismetAPIKey: the key used to check comments for spam (leave it blank if you
                  don't want to use Akismet).

Notes:

 - All themes must be installed in `gobble/themes`.
 - Missing configuration values will be given defaults.


Nginx
-----

Nginx can be used as a proxy to redirect traffic to the Gobble server.  Here's
an example server block:

    server {
            listen 80;
            server_name example.com;
            access_log /var/log/nginx/example.com.access.log;
            location / {
                proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
            }
    }


Libraries
---------

Gobble uses a handful of libraries to do its thing:

 - http://craig.is/making/rainbows
 - http://github.com/russross/blackfriday
 - http://github.com/bmizerany/pat
